---
layout: blog
title: Interactive theory
category: blog
tags: [human]  
summary: Humans and rag dolls.
image: /images/blog/threeSpecies.png
---

As a hobby I develop applications that allow users to interact with models through an intuitive visual interface.

## <a href="https://www.openprocessing.org/sketch/386248">Drift and Migration in Continuous Space</a>

This application simulates the evolution of a trait for a species on a single spatial axis. Migration is modeled with a stepping stone model where migrants can move to neighboring sites only. The dots shown represent trait values at each site. Two sliders are provided to allow the user to manipulate the migration rate and the variance of drift.

## Two Species Coevolution in Continuous Space

This application simulates the coevolution of two species on a single spatial axis. It is essentially a generalization of the above application, allowing for the effects of migration and drift as well. The traits involved for each species are colored red and green.  At the bottom of the application is a time-series plot of the instantaneous correlation between traits and the running average of correlation. Correlations have historically been used to determine support for a coevolutionary hypothesis, so it is an interesting quantity to track. For details about the theory see "When Is Correlation Coevolution?" by Nuismer, Gomulkiewicz and Ridenhour 2010.

## Three Species Spatial Coevolution

This application was built mostly for artistic expression. Here three species coevolve across a two dimensional grid. One species is colored blue, one red and one green. The trait values that evolve are brightness. To summarize these properties within each pixel, a weighted average of red, blue and green is computed, weighted by the mean brightness of each species within that pixel. The result is a colorful, evolving grid. The interactions between the three species can be thought of as a circular trophic system where each level consumes the next level and is consumed by the previous level. This induces a coevolutionary chase.
