---
layout: blog
title: Notes
category: blog
tags: [human]  
summary: Some things.
image: /images/blog/notes.png
---

These notes are the result of the interplay between my mathematical upbringing and my development as a theoretical biologist.

# Foundations

## A Probabilistic Treatment of Fitness

I denote the fitness of an individual by $\mathcal{W}$, a Poisson distributed random variable. Why Poisson? Firstly, the fitness of an individual is a non-negative integer, which is precisely the support of the Poisson distribution. Secondly, the Poisson distribution has the property of maximizing entropy for all distributions that share its support under the constraint of having some specified mean. This is another of way stating that, aside from the first <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moment_(mathematics)">statistical moment</a>, the Poisson distribution assumes the least information about the random variable it is modelling. If more information is known, a more precise distribution can be invoked. However, this would also make the resulting model less general.

We denote expectation by $\mathbb{E}$ and $\mathbb{E}\mathcal{W}\equiv W$ so that $W$ represents the mean fitness of an individual. This individual mean fitness may depend on its genotype ($\gamma$) or, more mechanistically, its phenotype ($z$). In general genotypes will be modelled as elements of some discrete space, usually finite, and phenotypes will usually be modelled as elements of the real line $\mathbb{R}$, although at times we will restrict the range of phenotypes to be a countable or even finite subset of $\mathbb{R}$. In the case of a random phenotype $Z$ we write $W(z)\equiv\mathbb{E}(\mathcal{W}(Z)\|Z=z)$, that is $W(z)$ is a conditional mean, conditioned on the phenotype $Z$ taking a particular value $z$. Using $\phi(z)$ for the density function of the populations phenotypic distribution, the total expectation of fitness, or, population mean fitness is $\overline W=\mathbb{E}\mathcal{W}(Z)=\int W(z)\phi(z)dz$

## Fitness and Population Dynamics

Let's suppose there are $N_t$ different individuals in the population at time $t$, each with fitness $\mathcal{W}_i$. If we further suppose that generations are non-overlapping, then we obtain the population size in the next generation as $N_{t+1}=\sum_{i=1}^{N_t}\mathcal{W}_t(i)$. If selection is absent so that each $\mathcal{W}_t(i)$ is independent and indentically distributed with mean $W_t$, then the expected population size in the next generation is $N_{t+1}=W_tN_t$.

## Fitness and Population Dynamics in Continuous Time

This section follows the blog post

If we assume that mean fitness is constant, we can derive continuous time dynamics of $N_t$. To do so, suppose that for $0<\delta<1$, $N_{t+\delta}=W^\delta N_t$. Then $N_{t+0}=N_t$ and $N_{t+1}=WN_t$. Hence

$$\frac{dN_t}{dt}=\lim_{\delta\rightarrow0}\frac{N_{t+\delta}-N_t}{\delta}=\lim_{\delta\rightarrow0}\frac{(W^\delta-1)}{\delta}N_t=\ln(W)N_t$$

In typical notation one would write $r$ in place of $\ln(W)$. This exposes an interesting connection between two very distinct notions of fitness. The notion of fitness that I've been working with, $W$, is called the Wrightian, or, multiplicative fitness. It is a non-negative number that corresponds to the number of offspring produced for some category. It's been called multiplicative fitness because the multiplication of any two Wrightian fitnesses is yet another Wrightian fitness. The natural log of this value is known as the Malthusian, or, additive fitness. Its value can be any real number and, depending on its use, can also be infinitely negative. Note that the log of a product is the sum of the logs. It's this basic log rule that provides the Malthusian fitness its additivity. The sum of any two Malthusian fitnesses is again a Malthusian fitness. To solidify the connection between these two notions of fitness, consider a population that becomes extinct instantaneously. Then each individual suddenly has a Wrightian fitness of zero and, hence, the population has a mean Wrightian fitness of zero. Then the Malthusian fitness of the population will be $\ln(0)$ which is $-\infty$, corresponding to the discontinuous drop in the population size.

## The Price Equations (Both Discrete and Continuous Time)

https://stevencarlislewalker.wordpress.com/2012/06/26/derivation-of-the-continuous-time-price-equation/

# Quantitative Genetics

## Derivation of The Breeder's Equation

### Lande's Regression Approach

### From The Price Equations

<!--## A Note On Linear Regression-->

## Calculating the Response in Mean Phenotype to Selection
### (or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Gaussian Functions)

Briefly, the normal distribution is the most important distribution due to various theorems and properties such as the central limit theorems and it's maximum entropy property. It's known for its mathematical elegance and empirical ubiquity and, like all distributions, can be identified by it's density and characteristic functions, both of which are Gaussian. In what follows I will use the terms Gaussian and normal interchangebally.

Gaussian functions play a central role in evolutionary theory. Arguably the most successful equation describing the evolution of a population, the breeder's equation, requires a normal phenotypic distribution. Typical notation is $z$ for the phenotype of an individual, $\bar z$ for the mean phenotype of the population, $\sigma^2$ for the phenotypic variance and $\phi$ for the phenotypic density. This provides

$$\varphi(z)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\sigma^2}}\exp\left(-\frac{(z-\bar z)^2}{2\sigma^2}\right).$$

If there's selection being imposed on the trait then the fitness $W(z)$, which denotes the average fitness of an individual with trait $z$, will not be identically constant. To find the response in mean phenotype to an episode of selection we use the breeder's equation $\Delta\bar z=G\frac{\partial\ln\overline W}{\partial\bar z}$ where $G=h^2\sigma^2$ is the additive genetic variance and $\overline W=\int_{-\infty}^\infty\phi(z)W(z)dz$ is the mean fitness of the population. However, in order to do so we must first calculate $\overline W$. In the case of stabilizing selection, this can be done quite nicely by assuming $W$ is also a Gaussian function of $z$. That is

$$W(z)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\omega^2}}\exp\left(-\frac{(z-\theta)^2}{2\omega^2}\right)$$

with $\theta$ being the phenotypic optimum and $\omega^2$ the phenotypic tolerance of selection, which should be thought of as the inverse of the strength of selection. The reason why this calculation is easier with a Gaussian fitness is due to the algebra that Gaussian functions obey. Specifically, the product of two Gaussians is yet another Gaussian. For example

$$W(z)\varphi(z)=\frac{C}{\sqrt{2\pi\tilde\sigma^2}}\exp\left(-\frac{(z-\tilde z)^2}{2\tilde\sigma^2}\right), \ \text{where} \ \tilde\sigma^2=\frac{\sigma^2\omega^2}{\sigma^2+\omega^2}, \ \tilde z=\frac{\sigma^2\theta+\omega^2\bar z}{\sigma^2+\omega^2}$$

and $C$ is some constant. What's interesting here is to note that the new parameter $\tilde z$ is a weighted average of $\theta$ and $\bar z$, weighted by the tolerance and variance. It should also be noted that $\tilde\sigma^2<\sigma^2$. One can show that as $\omega^2\rightarrow\infty$, $\tilde z\rightarrow\bar z$ and $\tilde\sigma^2\rightarrow\sigma^2$, in agreement with the concept of $\omega^2$ being the inverse of the strength of selection. With this result we see that $\overline W$ is just the integral of the above product over the whole real line. However, this product is just a scaled version of a probability density, scaled by $C$. Hence, $\overline W=C$. Then we need to calculate $C$, and for this I very briefly introduce the binary operation known as convolution.

The concept of a convolution can be readily captured graphically by visualizing the graphs of two functions $g_1(z)$ and $g_2(z)$ sliding across each other horizontally. We parameterize this sliding by $\tau$ which lives on the real number line. We'll let $g_2$ remain still and slide $g_1$. As $\tau$ runs from each end of the number line visualize the graph of $g_1$ sliding across $g_2$. As this sliding occurs, we accumulate the product of these two functions with an integral in such a way that we integrate out $\tau$. At this point I recommend taking a peek at the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convolution">wikipedia</a>. In symbols we denote the convolution between $g_1$ and $g_2$ by $$g_1 \ast g_2$$ and define it as

$$(g_1*g_2)(z)\equiv\int_{-\infty}^\infty g_1(\tau-z)g_2(z)dz.$$

($\equiv$ is often used for definitions)

It turns out that $C$ can be seen as the convolution of two functions. Namely $\phi_0(\bar z)\equiv\phi(0)$ and $W_0(\bar z)\equiv W(\bar z)$, the phenotypic density evaluated at zero and the fitness function evaluated at the population mean phenotype respectively. Although $\phi(0)$ and $W(\bar z)$ are technically constants, both of the resulting functions are sensitive to the value of $\bar z$. We could take care by rigorously defining these objects but I'll leave the mathematical formalities out of this discussion. Instead, observe

$$\varphi_0*W_0=\int_{-\infty}^\infty\varphi_0(\bar z-\tau)W_0(\tau)d\tau=\star.$$

If we use $z$ instead of $\tau$, this gives

$$\star=\int_{-\infty}^\infty\varphi_0(\bar z-z)W_0(z)dz$$

$$=\int_{-\infty}^\infty\left[\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\sigma^2}}\exp\left(-\frac{(\bar z-z)^2}{2\sigma^2}\right)\right]
\left[\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\omega^2}}\exp\left(-\frac{(z-\theta)^2}{2\omega^2}\right)\right]dz$$

$$=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}\varphi(z)W(z)dz=C.$$

Okay, so $C$ can be written as a convolution, so what? Well it turns out that Gaussian probability densities are closed under convolutions, which is to say that a convolution of two Gaussian densities is yet another Gaussian density. Specifically, if $g_1(z)$ is a Gaussian probability density with mean $\mu_1$ and variance $\sigma_1^2$ and similarly with $g_2(z)$, then $$g_1 \ast g_2=g_3(z)$$ is another Gaussian probability density with the mean $\mu_3=\mu_1+\mu_2$ and variance $\sigma_3^2=\sigma_1^2+\sigma_2^2.$ We now calculate $\overline W$ as

$$\overline W=\int_{-\infty}^\infty\varphi(z)W(z)dz=\varphi_0(\bar z)*W_0(\bar z)=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi(\sigma^2+\omega^2)}}\exp\left(-\frac{(\bar z-\theta)^2}{2(\sigma^2+\omega^2)}\right).$$

Finally, we obtain the response in mean phenotype to $W$ using the breeder's equation

$$\Delta\bar z=G\frac{\partial\ln\overline W}{\partial \bar z}=G\frac{\partial}{\partial\bar z}\left[\ln\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi(\sigma^2+\omega^2)}}\right)-\frac{(\bar z-\theta)^2}{2(\sigma^2+\omega^2)}\right]$$

$$=G\frac{\theta-\bar z}{\sigma^2+\omega^2}.$$

To summarize the properties of products and convolutions of Gaussians:

$$g_1(z)g_2(z)=Cg_3(z), \text{ where } C=\int g_1g_2dz, \ \mu_3=\frac{\sigma_1^2\mu_2+\sigma_2^2\mu_1}{\sigma_1^2+\sigma_2^2},
 \ \sigma_3^2=\frac{\sigma_1^2\sigma_2^2}{\sigma_1^2+\sigma_2^2}.$$
 
$$g_1(z)*g_2(z)=g_3(z), \text{ where } \mu_3=\mu_2+\mu_1, \ \sigma_3^2=\sigma_1^2+\sigma_2^2.$$

<!--## More On Gaussians (08/01/2017)

Now that we have solved the mystery of the mean fitness this might be a good time to review <a href="http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1558-5646.1976.tb00911.x/abstract">that 1976 classic</a>. Otherwise, I have a few more tricks with Gaussians that have come in handy during my journeys. Something that I noticed about our popular little friends is that they like to stay Gaussian. Doing things to them that perturb their normality makes them to recoil with disgust, causing symbols to combust from the paper upon which they were written. I have found that facilitating their Gaussianness has made my life much easier. One manifestation of this principle comes up when choosing a fitness function. <a href="http://ida.lib.uidaho.edu:3278/doi/10.1111/j.1558-5646.2009.00909.x/full">It's been shown that</a> that a formula, which is essentially identical to Bayes theorem, provides basically the most all around correct way of calculating the post-selection phenotypic distribution, the distribution of phenotypes left over after selection but before reproduction. In our notation it is

$$\tilde\varphi(z)=\frac{\varphi(z)W(z)}{\int\varphi Wdz}.$$

As we saw above, $\tilde\phi$ will remain Gaussian if $W$ is also Gaussian. The theory of the breeder's equation is linear regression which depends very much so on normality in both the parental and offspring populations. Since $\tilde\phi$ is our parental phenotypic distribution, we want to choose $W$ that retain normality. As you may have guessed, it's possible to show that if $\tilde\phi$ is Gaussian, then so is $W$. To do so let $\tilde\phi$ and $\phi$ be arbitrary Gaussians and solve for $W$. But some basic fitness functions are clearly not Gaussian such as the sigmoid representing directional selection or a parabola opening up representing diversifying selection. For some of these, a Gaussian approximation can work quite well. For the sigmoid one could instead set $\theta=\bar z + \delta$ as the phenotypic optimum in the Gaussian fitness used above for approximately the same effect. Since the mean fitness using the sigmoid is difficult to calculate and deal with once it's been calculated a linear approximation is usually invoked which results in the same dynamics with just using the aformentioned Gaussian and setting $\delta=\omega$. However, approximating diversifying selection has no easy solution. The reason for this is that diversifying selection perturbs normality in a very fundamental way. We might be able to approximate the parabola decently by adding two normal densities together so that their means are far enough away from each other to make the result is bimodal. In this case we can calculate $\tilde\phi$ and it would be the sum of two other Gaussians. This bimodality causes some serious difficulties with the breeder's equation as the mean phenotype of such a distribution will often fall in a valley, making it very unpopular and therefore not as interesting to track. In this case the two modes of the population could be independent enough to respond quite differently to the same fitness function. However, such math is beyond me. If anyone finds something fruitful, email me immediately. 

Getting back on track, we've been depending on the breeder's equation to capture the result of both selection and reproduction simultaneously. However, with the Bayesian update as our universal weapon for calculating post-selection distributions, we just need an equally universal way to calculate the post-reproduction distribution and we'll be set to go with a fancy theory that can account for arbitary phenotypic distributions.-->

## The Correspondence of Discrete and Continuous Time Evolutionary Dynamics

# Population Genetics

## Linearization of a Haploid Model of Selection

Here we cover a way to linearize the most simple model of genetic selection. We assume two genotypes, $A_1$ and $A_2$, with the frequencies $p$ and $q=1-p$ and fitnesses $W_1$ and $W_2$ respectively. Then $\overline W=pW_1+qW_2$ and the change in genotype frequency of $A_1$ is (ignoring all other processes)

$$\Delta p=pq\frac{\partial\ln\overline W}{\partial p}, \ \text{with} \ \overline W=pW_1+qW_2$$

The resulting dynamics are clearly nonlinear, but are they truly nonlinear or is this due to the fact that the state space is restricted to the open unit interval? If we stretch the unit interval across the whole real line, maybe the dynamics will become linear. To find out we define $x\equiv\ln\left(\frac{p}{q}\right)$ and calculate $\Delta x$. For brevity I will write $D_p$ in place of $\frac{\partial}{\partial p}$.

$$\Delta x=x'-x=\ln\left(\frac{p'}{q'}\right)-\ln\left(\frac{p}{q}\right)=\ln\left(\frac{p'q}{q'p}\right)$$

$$\implies\exp(\Delta x)=\frac{p+\Delta p}{q-\Delta p}\frac{q}{p}=\frac{1+qD_p\ln\overline W}{1-pD_p\ln\overline W}=\frac{\overline W+qD_p\overline W}{\overline W-pD_p\overline W}
=\frac{\overline W+(1-p)\left(W_1-W_2\right)}{\overline W-p\left(W_1-W_2\right)}=\frac{(2-p)W_1}{(2-p)W_2}$$

$$\implies \Delta x=\ln\left(\frac{W_1}{W_2}\right).$$

Hence, the dynamics stretched onto the whole real line are not only linear, but constant! I have yet to investigate whether this can be done for models involving higher ploidy.




